In an era where it is estimated that nearly 57% of the eligible African population is unbanked, and out of the commitment by African counties to formulate policies that will drive the financial inclusion agenda, the continent is said to have evolved into a mobile payment powerhouse. This rise in popularity of mobile money services has revolutionized transaction processing and brought about new and efficient ways of processing payments and remittance of money between individuals, businesses and countries.
Despite the many opportunities brought by the advent of mobile money technology, new risks and challenges have emerged. At the core of it, is the risk of fraudulent transactions initiated by individuals looking to exploit the system gaps that exist in this technology. Common types of mobile money fraud include unauthorized access to customer accounts, hacking, sim swaps, merchant identity fraud and phishing. Regrettably, conventional fraud detection systems employed by many service providers are inadequate to cope with the sophisticated fraud techniques used in the mobile money technology.
This project employs advanced machine learning techniques to analyze transactional data, identify patterns, and create an artificial intelligence model capable of identifying fraudulent transactions and flagging them for further investigation. The model uses transaction specific features such as transaction frequency, amount, origination and user behavior to accurately classify transactions as fraudulent or not as they occur.
The project approach and methodology involve data acquisition, preprocessing, feature engineering, model development and training, model evaluation and deployment, with a greater emphasis on the interpretability and accuracy of the results. Machine learning algorithms like logistic regression, decision trees and random forests, are explored and compared to identify the most effective approach. Gradient Descent is used to optimize the model performance
The model is tested and validated on a dataset that contains a diverse range of mobile money of which its performance is evaluated using metrics such as the confusion matrix and the area under the ROC curve.
The benefits to be derived from an effective fraud detection system are far reaching and will not only safeguard the financial interest of clients, but also contribute to enhancing security and reliability of the mobile money services.
